Documentation for blueprint product packaging (#133)
eclipse-theia/theia-website: src/docs/blueprint_documentation.md

All VS Code extensions that are already included in the product at start-up, are defined in `electron-app/package.json`.
They are listed under the `theiaPlugins` property as key-value pairs.
The keys can be freely chosen as long as they represent a valid folder name and are unique within the `theiaPlugins` property.
We suggest using the extension’s unique identifier.
The value is the download URL of the extensions.
It will automatically be downloaded during the application’s build process.
Any new plugin will be automatically downloaded the next time one of the following npm scripts is executed:

- `install` (which is the same as just running `yarn`)
- `prepare`
- `download:plugins`

To remove an extension from the product, simply delete its entry.
If plugins were not already downloaded, no further steps are required as downloaded plugins are ignored via gitignore.
However, previously downloaded plugins are not automatically removed.
Therefore, you need to remove its folder from the `electron-app/plugins` folder.
Alternatively, you can remove the whole `electron-app/plugins` folder and execute `yarn run download:plugins` to download all defined plugins.

### Extension sources

> While you can technically install extensions directly from [Microsoft’s VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/), you should check the Terms of Use to ensure compliance as Microsoft typically restricts usage to only VS Code.

Reviewer: I think we can omit this line, we would not want to encourage usage of the ms marketplace which is against their terms of use. In addition, "install extensions" is a little too generic, are you referring to extensions bundled with the application through the `package.json`, or through the extensions-view? (if through the extensions-view we do not support ms marketplace installations).

Theia’s about dialog can be customized by binding a custom subclass of Theia’s `AboutDialog` class to `AboutDialog`.
This is done by the Theia Blueprint product in the theia-example-updater extension.
The easiest way to customize the About dialog is to adapt the class `TheiaInstallerAboutDialog` in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/customization/theia-installer-about-dialog.tsx`.

The widget is bound in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/theia-updater-frontend-module.ts` like this:

```typescript
isBound(AboutDialog)
  ? rebind(AboutDialog).to(TheiaInstallerAboutDialog).inSingletonScope()
  : bind(AboutDialog).to(TheiaInstallerAboutDialog).inSingletonScope();
```

To use another custom dialog widget, remove this code, extend Theia’s AboutDialog class, and (re)bind it like above.

### Customizing the installer

The installers are created using [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/).
The corresponding configuration file is located at `electron-app/electron-builder.yml`.

#### Installer File Base Name

The installer files’ base names are defined by the `productName` property in `electron-app/electron-builder.yml`.

#### Windows Installer

> As is typical for Windows applications, there is an installation wizard for the windows version of the Theia blueprint.

Reviewer: I believe we mentioned it previously, but we should be consistent when naming `Theia Blueprint`.

```suggestion
As is typical for Windows applications, there is an installation wizard for the windows version of Theia Blueprint.
```

---
title: Packaging Theia as a Desktop Product
---

# Packaging Theia as a Desktop Product

Eclipse Theia Blueprint is an example product used as a reference on how to build desktop IDE-like products based on the Eclipse Theia framework.
Theia Blueprint assembles a selected subset of existing Theia features and extensions.
We provide installers for Theia Blueprint to be downloaded (see links below).

> In the respective git repository you can also find the source code for the product and its installers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the respective git repository you can also find the source code for Theia Blueprint and its installers.
```

This documentation will use these sources as a template. We will explain
how to customize this template so you can build your own custom Theia-based product including installers and packaging for installing the desktop-based version of your custom product on all major operating systems.

## Building a product and installers

The Theia Blueprint build uses [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) to package the product as a desktop application.

The product can be built and packaged with [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/).
Note that you usually can only package the product for the operating system you execute the build on.
For more information see the [electron-builder documentation on multi platform builds](https://www.electron.build/multi-platform-build).

The following commands may be run from the root directory of the repository.

> To install dependencies and build the application simply execute `yarn`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install dependencies and build the application, simply execute `yarn`.
```

You can also directly run the unpackaged application, e.g. to test it during development with `yarn start`.

> With `yarn package` you package the application into an executable file for your current operating system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With `yarn package`, you package the application into an executable file for your current operating system.
```

The packaged application will be located in `electron-app/dist`.
The folder `electron-app/dist/<OS>-unpackaged` will contain the files that are bundled into the final packaged executable.

> For Linux, this is an executable `.AppImage`, for Windows a `.exe` installer, and a `.pkg` installer for MacOS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Linux, this is an executable `.AppImage`, for Windows a `.exe` installer, and a `.pkg` installer for macOS.
```

> You can also only create the unpackaged content by running `yarn package:preview`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also just create the unpackaged content by running `yarn package:preview`.
```

This is useful to see the bundled files and saves time compared to a full package.

> To publish the current version of the product the command `yarn deploy` can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To publish the current version, the command `yarn deploy` can be used.
```

> For more information on publishing also see section "Configure publish and update".

Reviewer 2: Will this be a link?

Author: As mentioned here https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia-website/pull/133#discussion_r567837459 translating markdown links to html links does not work with the current set of plugins generating the HTML-Page. At least as far as I could see. So unfortunatelly this won't be a link.

## Signing

> [Electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) supports signing the packaged application on Windows and MacOS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) supports signing the packaged application on Windows and macOS.
```

The current signing scripts for Theia Blueprint are located in `electron-app/scripts`.

> The file `after-pack.js` is the current entry point for the configured signing via the Eclipse infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The file `after-pack.js` is the current entry point for the configured signing via Eclipse infrastructure.
```

> However, as signing is highly dependent on your setup, see the [electron builder’s signing documentation](https://www.electron.build/code-signing) on how to set up your own signing properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, as signing is highly dependent on your setup, see the [electron builder’s signing documentation](https://www.electron.build/code-signing) on how to properly set up your own signing.
```

## Updating Bundled VS Code Extensions

> The VS Code extensions, which are already included into the product on start-up, are defined in `electron-app/package.json`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All VS Code extensions that are already included in the product at start-up, are defined in `electron-app/package.json`.
```

They are listed under the `theiaPlugins` property as key-value pairs.
The keys can be freely chosen as long as they represent a valid folder name and are unique within the `theiaPlugins` property.
We suggest using the extension’s unique identifier.
The value is the download URL of the extensions.

> It will automatically be downloaded by the application’s build process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will automatically be downloaded during the application’s build process.
```

Any new plugin will be automatically downloaded the next time one of the following npm scripts is executed:

- `install` (which is the same as just running `yarn`)
- `prepare`
- `download:plugins`

To remove an extension from the product, simply delete its entry.

> If plugins were not already downloaded, no further steps are required because downloaded plugins are ignored via gitignore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If plugins were not already downloaded, no further steps are required as downloaded plugins are ignored via gitignore.
```

> However, already downloaded plugins are not automatically removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, previously downloaded plugins are not automatically removed.
```

Therefore, you need to remove its folder from the `electron-app/plugins` folder.
Alternatively, you can remove the whole `electron-app/plugins` folder and execute `yarn run download:plugins` to download all defined plugins.

### Extension sources

> While you can technically install extensions directly from [Microsoft’s VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/), it is not legal to our best knowledge to use this for products other than VSCode!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While you can technically install extensions directly from [Microsoft’s VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/), you should check the Terms of Use to ensure compliance as Microsoft typically restricts usage to only VSCode.
```

> Therefore, we use the [Open VSX Registry](https://open-vsx.org/) of the Eclipse Foundation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason, we use the [Open VSX Registry](https://open-vsx.org/) of the Eclipse Foundation.
```

> It is an open and community-driven VSCode extension place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is an open and community-driven VS Code extension marketplace.
```

> More information about it can be found on [eclipse.org](https://www.eclipse.org/legal/open-vsx-registry-faq/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More information can be found at [eclipse.org](https://www.eclipse.org/legal/open-vsx-registry-faq/).
```

## Customizing Theia Extensions

> Theia extensions can be added to the product by adding them to the `dependencies` in `electron-app/package.json`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eclipse Theia extensions can be added through `dependencies` in `electron-app/package.json`.
```

Like any other dependency, it will be installed via yarn.
Similarly, removing an extension works by removing it from `dependencies`.
For extensions already published on npm (or your private npm registry) this is all you need to do.

> An alternative approach is developing your extension inside the Theia Blueprint’s mono repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative approach is developing your extension inside Theia Blueprint’s mono repo.
```

> The advantages of this are that you don’t need to publish the extension and you can build the product with the local version of the extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of doing this is that you don’t need to publish the extension and can build the product with the local version of the extension.
```

This is facilitated by the lerna build already configured in the Theia Blueprint’s repository.
It links the product and all extensions in the repository together during the build.

The easiest way to create a new extension is to use the [official yeoman generator](https://www.npmjs.com/package/generator-theia-extension) for Theia extensions.
Assuming you have [yeoman](https://yeoman.io/) globally installed on your system, simply create a new extension in the repository root with `yo theia-extension --standalone`.
The `--standalone` flag is used to only create an extension but not a whole Theia application frame because it is already provided by the Theia Blueprint.

> After successfully generating the extension, make sure to add its folder name to the Theia Blueprint’s root `package.json` in the workspaces property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After successfully generating the extension, add its folder name to the Theia Blueprint’s root `package.json` in the workspaces property.
```

> After adding the extension to the dependencies in `electron-app/package.json` as described before, the new extension will be part of the built product.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After adding the extension to the dependencies in `electron-app/package.json` as described above, the new extension will be part of the built product.
```

## Branding

You can also add your own branding to the product by customizing the application icons and title, the welcome page and the About dialog.

> In addition some parts of the installers can be customized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, some parts of the installer can be customized.
```

> ### Customizing the app

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Customizing the App
```

#### Application Window Title

The window title is the application’s name if no workspace is opened and `<workspace name> — <application name>` if a workspace is opened.
The application name can be adapted in `electron-app/package.json`:
Open the file and adapt the value of property `theia.frontend.config.applicationName` to the desired name.

#### Application Icons

> The application’s icons are located in `electron-app/resources/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Application icons are located in `electron-app/resources/`.
```

> Just replace them with your own icons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Simply replace them with your own icons.
```

> Because each operating system handles icons differently, you need to replace them for all of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because each operating system handles icons differently, they should all be replaced to ensure proper use.
```

They map as follows:

> - MacOS: icons.icns

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- macOS: icons.icns
```

- Windows: icon.ico
- Linux: icons subfolder

> ### Customizing the welcome page

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Customizing the Welcome Page
```

> Theia’s welcome page can be customized by binding a custom `WidgetFactory` for Theia’s `GettingStartedWidget`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Eclipse Theia welcome page can be customized by binding a custom `WidgetFactory` for Theia’s `GettingStartedWidget`.
```

> This is done by the Theia Blueprint product in the theia-example-updater extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is done with Theia Blueprint in the theia-example-updater extension.
```

The easiest way to customize the welcome page is to adapt the class `TheiaInstallerGettingStartedWidget` in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/customization/theia-installer-getting-started-widget.tsx`.

The widget is bound in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/theia-updater-frontend-module.ts` like this:

```typescript
bind(TheiaInstallerGettingStartedWidget).toSelf();
  bind(WidgetFactory).toDynamicValue(context => ({
      id: GettingStartedWidget.ID,
      createWidget: () => context.container.get<TheiaInstallerGettingStartedWidget>(TheiaInstallerGettingStartedWidget),
  })).inSingletonScope();
```

To use another custom widget, remove this code and bind your widget correspondingly.

> ### Customizing the about dialog

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Customizing the About Dialog
```

> Theia’s about dialog can be customized by binding a custom subclass of Theia’s `AboutDialog` class to `AboutDialog`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Eclipse Theia about dialog can be customized by binding a custom subclass of Theia’s `AboutDialog` class to `AboutDialog`.
```

> This is done by the Theia Blueprint product in the theia-example-updater extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is done with Theia Blueprint in the theia-example-updater extension.
```

> The easiest way to customize the About dialog is to adapt the class `TheiaInstallerAboutDialog` in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/customization/theia-installer-about-dialog.tsx`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The easiest way to customize the about dialog is to adapt the class `TheiaInstallerAboutDialog` in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/customization/theia-installer-about-dialog.tsx`.
```

The widget is bound in `theia-example-updater/src/electron-browser/theia-updater-frontend-module.ts` like this:

```typescript
isBound(AboutDialog)
  ? rebind(AboutDialog).to(TheiaInstallerAboutDialog).inSingletonScope()
  : bind(AboutDialog).to(TheiaInstallerAboutDialog).inSingletonScope();
```

> To use another custom dialog widget, remove this code, extend Theia’s AboutDialog class, and (re)bind it like above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use another custom dialog widget, remove this code, extend Theia’s AboutDialog class, and (re)bind it as above.
```

> ### Customizing the installer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Customizing the Installer
```

The installers are created using [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/).
The corresponding configuration file is located at `electron-app/electron-builder.yml`.

#### Installer File Base Name

The installer files’ base names are defined by the `productName` property in `electron-app/electron-builder.yml`.

#### Windows Installer

> As is typical for Windows applications, there is an installation wizard for the windows version of Theia Blueprint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As is typical for Windows applications, there is an installation wizard for the Windows version of Theia Blueprint.
```

The installer is configured in the nsis section of the configuration file.
Available customizations include settings such as:

- Icons
- Sidebar image
- License
- One click installation
- Automatic application start after installation
- Whether users can change the installation directory

More details on available options and how they can be customized can be found in the [official electron builder documentation](https://www.electron.build/configuration/nsis).
This documentation also includes information about more advanced features such as custom NSIS scripts.

> ## Configure publish and update

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configure Publish and Update
```

> The Theia Blueprint uses [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) to create and publish installers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Theia Blueprint uses [electron-builder](https://www.electron.build/) to create and publish installers.
```

> Furthermore, it uses [electron-updater](https://www.npmjs.com/package/electron-updater), which is also developed by the electron-builder organisation, to provide automatic updates of the installed application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also uses [electron-updater](https://www.npmjs.com/package/electron-updater), developed by the electron-builder organization, to provide automatic updates of the installed application.
```

There are various deployment targets which can be configured in the `electron-app/package.json` and `electron-app/electron-builder.yml` as documented [here](https://www.electron.build/configuration/publish) in the Electron Builder documentation.
Multiple publish configurations can be configured.
Thereby, the first one is automatically used by the updater to look for available updates.

> The currently used generic publishing method does not automatically publish to the specified server but is just used as the lookup location for the updater.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The currently used generic publishing method does not automatically publish to the specified server, but is just used as the lookup location for the updater.
```

---
title: Packaging Theia as a Desktop Product
---

# Packaging Theia as a Desktop Product

> Eclipse Theia Blueprint product is a template to showcase the capabilities of Theia as well as how to build desktop-based products based on the platform.

Reviewer: Throughout the documentation we refer to the product differently, we should be consistent in the naming.
For instance I see:
- `Eclipse Theia Blueprint`
- `Theia Blueprint`
- `Theia blueprint`

The first mention can be `Eclipse Theia Blueprint` (as per the foundation rules), but subsequent references should be `Theia Blueprint` and not `Theia blueprint`.

Author: First mention is `Eclipse Theia Blueprint` now, after that we use `Theia Blueprint`

> Eclipse Theia Blueprint product is a template to showcase the capabilities of Theia as well as how to build desktop-based products based on the platform.

Reviewer: I believe it can be reworked to be more clear, and read better:

```suggestion
Eclipse Theia Blueprint is an example product used as a reference on how to build desktop IDE-like products based on the Eclipse Theia framework.
```

Theia Blueprint assembles a selected subset of existing Theia features and extensions.

> We provide installers for Theia Blueprint to be downloaded (see below) from the Theia webpage.

Reviewer: Rather than "(see below)" it'd be better to link the section.

Author: These kind of links don't work with the current gatsby plugins as far as I could see.

> We provide installers for Theia Blueprint to be downloaded (see below) from the Theia webpage.

Reviewer: I believe "Theia webpage" is unclear. If we are referencing the eclipse-theia page on the eclipse foundation, we can directly link it:

- https://download.eclipse.org/theia/

Author: I removed the last part of the sentence.

> In the respective git Repository you can also find the source code the product and its installers were built from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the respective git repository you can also find the source code for the product and its installers.
```

> This is also the starting point for this documentation that is about how to customize this template to build your own custom Theia-based product and installers and packaging for installing the Desktop-based version of your custom product on all major operating systems.

Reviewer: > This is also the starting point for this documentation that is about

This sentence does not read particularly well and can be reworded.

Author: Suggestion:
This documentation will use these sources as a template. We will explain how to customize this template so you can build your own custom Theia-based product including installers and packaging for installing the desktop-based version of your custom product on all major operating systems.

> This is also the starting point for this documentation that is about how to customize this template to build your own custom Theia-based product and installers and packaging for installing the Desktop-based version of your custom product on all major operating systems.

Reviewer: Previously we used `desktop-based`, and now we have `Desktop-based`. My only comment is to be consistent across the documentation.

This documentation will provide you with a basic introduction how the Blueprint product and its installers/packaging are built.
We then detail how to customize the product by adjusting the built-in VS Code and Theia extensions for the product and the branding of the product.

> Finally, we conclude with how to publish and update your products and their packaging and installers.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need to describe the sections, this paragraph will become outdated quickly as we include new sections. If we'd like to outline the later sections, we can simply use an bullet outline.

Author: Removed the paragraph
